More LabIcon docs (#8246)
jupyterlab/jupyterlab: docs/source/developer/ui_components.rst

.. _ui_components:

Reusing JupyterLab UI
=====================

The `@jupyterlab/ui-components <http://jupyterlab.github.io/jupyterlab/ui-components/index.html>`__
package provides UI elements that are widely used in JupyterLab core,
and that can be reused in your own extensions.

For example, all of the icons in JupyterLab core can be reused via
``LabIcon``. You can also use ``LabIcon`` to create your own custom
icons that will be able to automatically change color to match the
current JupyterLab theme.

.. contents:: Explainer docs
   :local:
   :depth: 1

``LabIcon`` - set up and render icons
-------------------------------------

``LabIcon`` is the icon class used by JupyterLab, and is part of the new
icon system introduced in JupyterLab v2.0.

Background

> ~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: Could we move the background to the end? I really appreciate it, but think it's probably best to just show ppl how to use it first and foremost, and then they can read about the history after.

Author: sure

Icon handling in Jupyterlab
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Pre jlab-2.0, most icons were created using the icons-as-css-background

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pre JupyterLab version 2.0, most icons were created using the icons-as-css-background
```

using one of these ``LabIcon`` instances.

Using the icons in your own code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can use any of JupyterLab icons in your own code via an ``import``
statement. For example, to use ``jupyterIcon`` you would first do:

.. code:: typescript

   import { jupyterIcon } from '@jupyterlab/ui-components';

How to render an icon into a DOM node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Icons can be added as children to any ``div`` or ``span`` nodes using
the ``icon.element(...)`` method (where ``icon`` is any instance of
``LabIcon``). For example, to render the Jupyter icon you could do:

.. code:: typescript

   jupyterIcon.element({
     container: elem,
     height: '16px',
     width: '16px',
     marginLeft: '2px'
   });

where ``elem`` is any ``HTMLElement`` with a ``div`` or ``span`` tag. As
shown in the above example, the icon can be styled by passing CSS
parameters into ``.element(...)``. Any valid CSS parameter can be used
(one catch: snake case params do have to be converted to camel case:
instead of ``foo-bar: '8px'``, you’d need to use ``fooBar: '8px'``.

How to render an icon as a React component

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: I felt like there were more ways to use it that these two, but maybe I was mis-remembering? Like is there some way we use it by the "name"? Or what function does the name play?

Author: > Like is there some way we use it by the "name"?

Yes, there are the `LabIcon.resolveElement` and `LabIcon.resolveReact` static methods. The use case for these is very narrow; so far the only use case I've actually seen out in extensionland is for reusing our FileType icons in custom browser implementations. There's also a bunch of ways to shoot yourself in the foot with these. For now, I'm comfortable leaving the `resolveX` methods in the [API docs](http://jupyterlab.github.io/jupyterlab/ui-components/classes/labicon.html#resolveelement), where they are well covered...

at least that's what I would have liked to have said. I just now took a closer look at the API docs, and it looks like most of my docstrings are getting butchered by typedoc. Whelp, guess that's another thing to put on the list of "shit to fix in the API docs"

Reviewer: OK! So are all the other methods/attributes (like `svgstr`) effectively deprecated?

Author: ? I don't quite follow your logic there in declaring `svgstr` deprecated. There are a handful of public fields (`name`, `svgstr`, `render`) in a LabIcon instance that exist for the purpose of exposing metadata and/or integrating with external projects, eg `render` is used in the Lumino integration. `name` and `svgstr` are also exposed for the purpose of consistency across icon interfaces, so that eg `IFileType.icon` in `rendermime-interfaces` can take either a `LabIcon` instance or a simple `{name, svgstr}` pair. They aren't relevant for the extension dev docs, though I may add some more info about them to the API docs.

leak <https://stackoverflow.com/a/48198011/425458>`__.

How to create your own custom ``LabIcon``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can create your own custom icon by constructing a new instance of
``LabIcon``:

.. code:: typescript

   export const fooIcon = new LabIcon({
     name: 'barpkg:foo',
     svgstr: '<svg>...</svg>'
   });

where ``name`` should be of the form “your-pkg:icon-name”, and
``svgstr`` is the raw contents of your icon’s svg file.

How to create a new ``LabIcon`` from an external svg file
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Although you can copy-and-paste an svg directly into the ``LabIcon``
constructor, the best practice is to keep the svg for each of your icons
in its own separate svg file. You will need to have an ``svg.d.ts`` file
at the root of your project’s ``src`` directory:

.. code:: typescript

   // svg.d.ts

   declare module '*.svg' {
     const value: string;
     export default value;
   }

You can then ``import`` the contents of an svg file:

.. code:: typescript

   import fooSvgstr from 'path-to-your/foo.svg';

   export const fooIcon = new LabIcon({
     name: 'barpkg:foo',
     svgstr: fooSvgstr
   });

> Sync icon color to JupyterLab theme

Reviewer: I am not too keen about having duplicate text in three places checked into VCS, because it seems likely we might update it in one place and forget the other two. Any ideas on how to make this have a single source of truth?

Author: > Any ideas on how to make this have a single source of truth?

Nope, but I'll take suggestions :)

More seriously, I do have some notions about how to improve the `docs:init` build here, but they're all waaay out of scope for what's supposed to be a PR updating the LabIcon docs. I am actively working on improving the API docs, and may be able to fold this issue into that work as well.

For now, we treat the sources in `ui-components/docs` as the source of truth. Running `jlpm docs:init` (while in `ui-components`) will automatically propagate any changes to the README and the dev docs. If anyone does end up commiting changes directly to the wrong copy, I'll deal with manually resolving the conflicts

Author: I've now added a warning comment to the top of the autogenerated files:

```html
<!--
THIS FILE IS AUTOGENERATED, DO NOT EDIT

Instead, make changes to docs sources in `packages/ui-components/docs`,
then run "jlpm docs:init" to refresh the built docs
-->
```

Reviewer: > Running jlpm docs:init (while in ui-components) will automatically propagate any changes to the README and the dev docs. If anyone does end up commiting changes directly to the wrong copy, I'll deal with manually resolving the conflicts

For the README maybe we could just link to that file instead of copying? And maybe for the docs we could have it do that live generation when generating the docs instead of storing it in VCS?

What do you think?

Author: > For the README maybe we could just link to that file instead of copying? And maybe for the docs we could have it do that live generation when generating the docs instead of storing it in VCS?

As I said in an earlier comment, that is exactly how I had things set up earlier in this PR at b921254. The problem was that linking from `ui-components/README.md` to another markdown file doesn't work in the rendered API docs.

In the future I may end up just adding a link in the README.md to the live rendered LabIcon dev docs on readthedocs. However, that will be completely broken until the new LabIcon docs have been pushed to readthedocs in the first place, so I think it's best to do that in the next PR

Author: basically, I don't want to roll something project wide and complicated that I'm just going to remove in a future PR. Keeping the docs checked in in 3 places is dumb, but it's also simple and renders reliably

   <li>jp-icon2: <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#424242"/><title>#424242</title></svg> / <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#eee"/><title>#eee</title></svg></li>
   <li>jp-icon3: <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#616161"/><title>#616161</title></svg> / <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#bdbdbd"/><title>#bdbdbd</title></svg></li>
   <li>jp-icon4: <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#757575"/><title>#757575</title></svg> / <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#757575"/><title>#757575</title></svg></li>
   </ul>

Most one-color icons in JupyterLab (including the sidebar and toolbar
icons) are colored using the ``jp-icon3`` class.

For light/dark themes, ``jp-icon0`` corresponds to the darkest/lighest
background color, while ``jp-icon1`` is somewhat lighter/darker, and so
forth.

``jp-icon-accentX``: match to theme background
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

.. raw:: html

   <ul>

>    <li>jp-icon-accent0: <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#fff"/><title>#fff</title></svg> / <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#111"/><title>#111</title></svg></li>

Reviewer: Not sure if we should hard code the color values here. Maybe instead say semantically what the accents are for? Or link to where they are defined? Just imagining if we ever change these values we might forget to update the docs?

Author: This is supposed to render as a list of color swatches. It shows up correctly in the built dev docs/my local markdown preview:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2263641/80433012-c1d23300-88c3-11ea-89e3-f89d66b51f1b.png)

but it doesn't look like it's showing up correctly on github (the inline svgs are getting scrubbed). What's it look like to you?

Author: I'm of the opinion that a picture is worth a thousand semantic explanations, especially when describing anything visual/having to do with design. So I think the potential tradeoffs are worth it... assuming the swatches render correctly.

These particular colors haven't changed in the last couple of years, and aren't likely to change significantly/frequently in the future. Longer term, we can look into auto-generating the documentation color swatches from the theme CSS.

Reviewer: > but it doesn't look like it's showing up correctly on github (the inline svgs are getting scrubbed). What's it look like to you?

Yeah it didn't look like colors to me.

> These particular colors haven't changed in the last couple of years, and aren't likely to change significantly/frequently in the future. Longer term, we can look into auto-generating the documentation color swatches from the theme CSS.

OK sounds good to me! I am convinced.

   <li>jp-icon-accent1: <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#fff"/><title>#fff</title></svg> / <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#212121"/><title>#212121</title></svg></li>
   <li>jp-icon-accent2: <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#eee"/><title>#eee</title></svg> / <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#424242"/><title>#424242</title></svg></li>
   <li>jp-icon-accent3: <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#bdbdbd"/><title>#bdbdbd</title></svg> / <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#616161"/><title>#616161bdbdbd</title></svg></li>
   <li>jp-icon-accent4: <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#757575"/><title>#757575</title></svg> / <svg width="16" viewBox="0 0 1 1"><rect width="1" height="1" fill="#757575"/><title>#757575</title></svg></li>
   </ul>

For light/dark themes, ``jp-icon-accent0`` corresponds to the
lighest/darkest background color, while ``jp-icon-accent1`` is somewhat

> darker/lighter, and so forth.

Reviewer: Yeah I feel like this is enough!

Author: Yep, I think the swatches get the point across more clearly here anyway
